<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>To Nelly van de Grift (Mrs. Adulfo Sanchez, of Monterey)</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter">
		<section id="dedication" epub:type="dedication">
			<h2>To Nelly van de Grift<br/>
			(<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Adulfo Sanchez, of Monterey)</h2>
			<p>At last, after so many years, I have the pleasure of reintroducing you to “Prince Otto,” whom you will remember a very little fellow, no bigger in fact than a few sheets of memoranda written for me by your kind hand. The sight of his name will carry you back to an old wooden house embowered in creepers; a house that was far gone in the respectable stages of antiquity and seemed indissoluble from the green garden in which it stood, and that yet was a sea-traveller in its younger days, and had come round the Horn piecemeal in the belly of a ship, and might have heard the seamen stamping and shouting and the note of the boatswain’s whistle. It will recall to you the nondescript inhabitants now so widely scattered:⁠—the two horses, the dog, and the four cats, some of them still looking in your face as you read these lines;⁠—the poor lady, so unfortunately married to an author;⁠—the China boy, by this time, perhaps, baiting his line by the banks of a river in the Flowery Land;⁠—and in particular the Scot who was then sick apparently unto death, and whom you did so much to cheer and keep in good behaviour.</p>
			<p>You may remember that he was full of ambitions and designs: so soon as he had his health again completely, you may remember the fortune he was to earn, the journeys he was to go upon, the delights he was to enjoy and confer, and (among other matters) the masterpiece he was to make of “Prince Otto”!</p>
			<p>Well, we will not give in that we are finally beaten. We read together in those days the story of Braddock, and how, as he was carried dying from the scene of his defeat, he promised himself to do better another time: a story that will always touch a brave heart, and a dying speech worthy of a more fortunate commander. I try to be of Braddock’s mind. I still mean to get my health again; I still purpose, by hook or crook, this book or the next, to launch a masterpiece; and I still intend⁠—somehow, some time or other⁠—to see your face and to hold your hand.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile, this little paper traveller goes forth instead, crosses the great seas and the long plains and the dark mountains, and comes at last to your door in Monterey, charged with tender greetings. Pray you, take him in. He comes from a house where (even as in your own) there are gathered together some of the waifs of our company at Oakland: a house⁠—for all its outlandish Gaelic name and distant station⁠—where you are well-beloved.</p>
			<p style="text-align: right">R. L. S.</p>
			<p><i>Skerryvore</i>,<br/>
			 Bournemouth.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
